# Список литературы

1\. Гришко П. Ю., Мищенко А. В., Ивко О. В. Возможности
мультипараметрической магнитно-резонансной томографии в оценке
эффективности неоадъювантного лечения рака прямой кишки. // Лучевая
диагностика и терапия. 2019. № 4 (10). C. 49--56.

2\. Каприн А. Д., Старинский В. В., Шахзадова А. О. Злокачественные
новообразования в России в 2021 году (заболеваемость и смертность) / А.
Д. Каприн, В. В. Старинский, А. О. Шахзадова, ФГБУ «МНИОИ им. П.А.
Герцена» МинздраваРоссии.:, 2022. 252 c.

3\. Ale Ali H. \[и др.\]. Extramural venous invasion in rectal cancer:
overview of imaging, histopathology, and clinical implications //
Abdominal Radiology (New York). 2019. № 1 (44). C. 1--10.

4\. Al-Sukhni E. \[и др.\]. Diagnostic accuracy of MRI for assessment of
T category, lymph node metastases, and circumferential resection margin
involvement in patients with rectal cancer: a systematic review and
meta-analysis // Annals of Surgical Oncology. 2012. № 7 (19). C.
2212--2223.

5\. Amin M. B. \[и др.\]. The Eighth Edition AJCC Cancer Staging Manual:
Continuing to build a bridge from a population-based to a more
«personalized» approach to cancer staging // CA: a cancer journal for
clinicians. 2017. № 2 (67). C. 93--99.

6\. Battersby N. J. \[и др.\]. Prospective Validation of a Low Rectal
Cancer Magnetic Resonance Imaging Staging System and Development of a
Local Recurrence Risk Stratification Model: The MERCURY II Study //
Annals of Surgery. 2016. № 4 (263). C. 751--760.

7\. Beets-Tan R. G. H. \[и др.\]. Magnetic resonance imaging for
clinical management of rectal cancer: Updated recommendations from the
2016 European Society of Gastrointestinal and Abdominal Radiology
(ESGAR) consensus meeting // European Radiology. 2018. № 4 (28). C.
1465--1475.

8\. Beets-Tan R. G. H. \[и др.\]. Magnetic resonance imaging for
clinical management of rectal cancer: Updated recommendations from the
2016 European Society of Gastrointestinal and Abdominal Radiology
(ESGAR) consensus meeting // European Radiology. 2018. № 4 (28). C.
1465--1475.

9\. Benson A. B. \[и др.\]. Colon Cancer, Version 3.2024, NCCN Clinical
Practice Guidelines in Oncology // Journal of the National Comprehensive
Cancer Network: JNCCN. 2024. № 2 D (22). C. e240029.

10\. Brown G. \[и др.\]. Preoperative assessment of prognostic factors
in rectal cancer using high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging // The
British Journal of Surgery. 2003. № 3 (90). C. 355--364.

11\. Chand M. \[и др.\]. Extramural venous invasion is a potential
imaging predictive biomarker of neoadjuvant treatment in rectal cancer
// British Journal of Cancer. 2014. № 1 (110). C. 19--25.

12\. Heald R. J., Ryall R. D. Recurrence and survival after total
mesorectal excision for rectal cancer // Lancet (London, England). 1986.
№ 8496 (1). C. 1479--1482.

13\. Huxley R. R. \[и др.\]. The impact of dietary and lifestyle risk
factors on risk of colorectal cancer: a quantitative overview of the
epidemiological evidence // International Journal of Cancer. 2009. № 1
(125). C. 171--180.

14\. Jhaveri K. S. \[и др.\]. MRI Detection of Extramural Venous
Invasion in Rectal Cancer: Correlation With Histopathology Using Elastin
Stain // AJR. American journal of roentgenology. 2016. № 4 (206). C.
747--755.

15\. Johns L. E., Houlston R. S. A systematic review and meta-analysis
of familial colorectal cancer risk // The American Journal of
Gastroenterology. 2001. № 10 (96). C. 2992--3003.

16\. Kikuchi R. \[и др.\]. Management of early invasive colorectal
cancer. Risk of recurrence and clinical guidelines // Diseases of the
Colon and Rectum. 1995. № 12 (38). C. 1286--1295.

17\. Kim T.-H. \[и др.\]. The Diagnostic Performance of MRI for
Detection of Extramural Venous Invasion in Colorectal Cancer: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Literature // AJR. American
journal of roentgenology. 2019. № 3 (213). C. 575--585.

18\. KSAR Study Group for Rectal Cancer Essential Items for Structured
Reporting of Rectal Cancer MRI: 2016 Consensus Recommendation from the
Korean Society of Abdominal Radiology // Korean Journal of Radiology.
2017. № 1 (18). C. 132--151.

19\. Lalwani N. \[и др.\]. Baseline MR Staging of Rectal Cancer: A
Practical Approach // Seminars in Roentgenology. 2021. № 2 (56). C.
164--176.

20\. MERCURY Study Group Extramural depth of tumor invasion at
thin-section MR in patients with rectal cancer: results of the MERCURY
study // Radiology. 2007. № 1 (243). C. 132--139.

21\. Messenger D. E., Driman D. K., Kirsch R. Developments in the
assessment of venous invasion in colorectal cancer: implications for
future practice and patient outcome // Human Pathology. 2012. № 7 (43).
C. 965--973.

22\. Nougaret S. \[и др.\]. The use of MR imaging in treatment planning
for patients with rectal carcinoma: have you checked the «DISTANCE»? //
Radiology. 2013. № 2 (268). C. 330--344.

23\. Quirke P., Williams G. Minimum dataset for colorectal cancer
histopathology reports // 2000.

24\. Raskov H. \[и др.\]. Colorectal carcinogenesis\--update and
perspectives // World Journal of Gastroenterology. 2014. № 48 (20). C.
18151--18164.

25\. Rasool S. \[и др.\]. A comparative overview of general risk factors
associated with the incidence of colorectal cancer // Tumour Biology:
The Journal of the International Society for Oncodevelopmental Biology
and Medicine. 2013. № 5 (34). C. 2469--2476.

26\. Salerno G. V. \[и др.\]. Magnetic resonance imaging prediction of
an involved surgical resection margin in low rectal cancer // Diseases
of the Colon and Rectum. 2009. № 4 (52). C. 632--639.

27\. Shihab O. C. \[и др.\]. Patients with low rectal cancer treated by
abdominoperineal excision have worse tumors and higher involved margin
rates compared with patients treated by anterior resection // Diseases
of the Colon and Rectum. 2010. № 1 (53). C. 53--56.

28\. Shihab O. C. \[и др.\]. Can a novel MRI staging system for low
rectal cancer aid surgical planning? // Diseases of the Colon and
Rectum. 2011. № 10 (54). C. 1260--1264.

29\. Stoner R. C., Korngold E. K. Anatomy of Pelvic Lymph Nodal Stations
and Their Role in Staging of Rectal Cancers // Seminars in
Roentgenology. 2021. № 2 (56). C. 152--157.

30\. Taylor F. G. M. \[и др.\]. One millimetre is the safe cut-off for
magnetic resonance imaging prediction of surgical margin status in
rectal cancer // The British Journal of Surgery. 2011. № 6 (98). C.
872--879.

31\. Taylor F. G. M. \[и др.\]. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging
assessment of circumferential resection margin predicts disease-free
survival and local recurrence: 5-year follow-up results of the MERCURY
study // Journal of Clinical Oncology: Official Journal of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2014. № 1 (32). C. 34--43.

32\. Tenesa A., Dunlop M. G. New insights into the aetiology of
colorectal cancer from genome-wide association studies // Nature
Reviews. Genetics. 2009. № 6 (10). C. 353--358.

33\. Wnorowski A. M. \[и др.\]. Mucin-Containing Rectal Carcinomas:
Overview of Unique Clinical and Imaging Features // AJR. American
journal of roentgenology. 2019. № 1 (213). C. 26--34.

34\. Yu S. K. T. \[и др.\]. Magnetic resonance imaging defined mucinous
rectal carcinoma is an independent imaging biomarker for poor prognosis
and poor response to preoperative chemoradiotherapy // European Journal
of Cancer (Oxford, England: 1990). 2014. № 5 (50). C. 920--927.

35\. Zhang H. \[и др.\]. Chemical shift effect predicting lymph node
status in rectal cancer using high-resolution MR imaging with
node-for-node matched histopathological validation // European
Radiology. 2017. № 9 (27). C. 3845--3855.

36\. Νikolouzakis Τ. Κ. \[и др.\]. Detailed and applied anatomy for
improved rectal cancer treatment // Annals of Gastroenterology. 2019. №
5 (32). C. 431--440.

37\. Клинические рекомендации, одобренные научным советом МЗ РФ, Рак
прямой кишки 2023.
